---
layout: post
date: 2017-02-08
title: "The Responsibility of Business Owners in the Questions of Human Extinction"
comments: true
categories: philosophy history
author_name: Tammy Mackenzie
author_url: /author/tammy
author_avatar: tammy
show_avatar: true
read_time: 10
feature_image: DeathtoStock_TheCollaborative-2
square_related: recommend-DeathtoStock_TheCollaborative-2
twitter_image: recommend-DeathtoStock_TheCollaborative-2
fb_image: recommend-DeathtoStock_TheCollaborative-2
twitter_id: 16282823
description: "Can business people save the world?"
show_related_posts: false
---

 **Update April 2017:** A note of warning to the reader.

This article discusses topics that may trigger feelings of fear or anger, which
can lead to social problems for all of us. According to psychologists ([Harvard
Health](http://www.health.harvard.edu/newsletter_article/in-praise-of-gratitude))
theologians ([Researchgate](https://micda.psc.isr.umich.edu/pubs/abs/9578)), and
neurologists ([University of Southern
California](http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01491/full)),
practicing gratitude and compassion can reestablish good mental health and
relationships. *Thank you to a wise advisor, Geshe Ngawang Sonam, for insight
and inspiration on the importance of doing so. -Tam.*

> **_Once upon a time, you saw a way to do something a little differently, a
little better._**

## How We Got Here

American philosopher and humanist Noam Chomsky wrote an essay called [“The
Responsibility of Intellectuals”](https://chomsky.info/19670223/). In it, he
calls out the intellectuals of his country, demanding that they take a rational
stand against American imperialism and atrocities abroad, and cease seeking the
trappings of power through justifications of genocide. It’s a critical argument
against a global “cult of the expert” that allows only some powerful, generally
rich, male, beige people, to speak as experts in morality and ideology. He
argues that such questions are subjective, and so cannot give rise to general
expertise. He further goes on to detail the charlatanism of those who claim to
be experts in public policies and international affairs, their blatant lying and
thefts, misrepresentations of history, and active role in crimes from blackmail
to mass murder.

The “Responsibility of Intellectuals” was published in 1967, and Mr. Chomsky was
talking about the war in Vietnam. His questions were: what is the responsibility
of intellectuals in war-mongering, and what is the responsibility of a people
whose country goes to war? As a case in point: what of those many, many [German
civilians](https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2001/feb/17/johnezard) who knew and
who let World War II happen, who supported the massacre of their neighbors?

Today, we face [global
extinction](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-mix/wp/2015/06/22/the-earth-is-on-the-brink-of-a-sixth-mass-extinction-scientists-say-and-its-humans-fault/?utm_term=.ee79fdaf268a).
What now is the responsibility of powerful people, of rich people, towards the
rest of life? We benefit as did Mr. Chomsky’s intellectual class from the
pinnacle of human ingenuity, of centuries of technological and social
innovations, of health, safety, and access to information the likes of which no
humans saw, ever, nor likely will again. What is our responsibility, having
benefited from the habits and wastes that now cause death worldwide, and risk
killing off all hope for life?

In the 1790’s, within the context of the start of the Industrial Revolution,
Britain and America began to pass laws that are today the business laws and free
trade agreements of every country on earth ([Wikipedia’s history of
Corporations](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Corporation)). Incorporation means
“to be put into a body”. It works like this: a person or group of people pay to
create an Imaginary Person. Like a Real Person, that Imaginary Person can sign
contracts and own assets. It can give money to its Real friends. It can operate
a business, and this Imaginary Person pays less tax than a Real Person doing the
same work. It can benefit from the proceeds of most criminal acts, and take part
in crimes domestically and overseas but, being Imaginary, it can’t be put in
jail. (“[Could GM Be Charged With
Murder?”](http://fortune.com/2014/06/05/could-gm-be-charged-with-murder/) Hint:
No, “it” can’t.) The [only laws that can
touch](http://www.lop.parl.gc.ca/content/lop/researchpublications/prb0825-e.htm)
the Real directors of a corporation are tax laws and some civil tort, mitigated
by [intricate and expensive
accounting](https://turbotax.intuit.ca/tax-resources/business-owner-tax/incorporating-in-canada-tax-advantages.jsp)
and
[lobbying](https://lobbycanada.gc.ca/app/secure/ocl/lrs/do/slctRprt?action=selectReport).
Lastly, quite unlike a Real Person, an Imaginary, in-corporated Person has a
geas – a set of rules it must absolutely follow, chief among which is: “Profit
at any cost.”

> **_geas ɡeSH/noun_**  **_1. (in Irish folklore) an obligation or prohibition
magically imposed on a person._**

Incorporation laws were specifically set up to allow a small group of rich and
powerful people to continue to grow more rich and powerful. Today, thanks to
those laws, we have some Incorporated Persons, like [Inhuman Evil
Masterminds](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/oil-cover-up-climate_us_570e98bbe4b0ffa5937df6ce)
who are legally bound to kill us by doing things like holding oil reserves in
excess of what the planet can carry, and [fighting climate
policy](http://www.carbontracker.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/Unburnable-Carbon-Full-rev2-1.pdf)
to keep doing it. Corporations of all kinds, large and small, who purchase the
advantages of lower taxes on income and deductible expenses, while closer and
closer to home people are starting to starve. Skipping meat (other than for
important [health, environmental, and ethical
concerns](https://www.vegansociety.com/go-vegan/why-go-vegan)), skipping fresh
produce, because it would mean eviction. (See: [Poverty and food
quality](http://frac.org/initiatives/hunger-and-obesity/why-are-low-income-and-food-insecure-people-vulnerable-to-obesity/),
See: [Rise in food
prices](https://www.oxfam.ca/grow/learn/why_food_prices_are_rising), See: [Food
insecurity in
Montreal](http://www.peoplespotato.com/montreal-food-assistance-guide.html)).

> **_Never mind the civilians.  Why didn’t soldiers stop?  The police?  Because
they’re human: [The Stanford Prison
Experiment.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3XN2X72jrFk)_**

The question of whether a person ought to help another in need is ancient. We
find it in religion ([The Good
Samaritan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parable_of_the_Good_Samaritan),
[Buddhist
compassion](http://buddhism.about.com/od/basicbuddhistteachings/a/compassion.htm)),
in philosophy, ([Categorical
Imperative](https://www.britannica.com/topic/categorical-imperative)), and at
home ([Blue
balls](http://www.thefrisky.com/2011-12-09/4-things-ladies-should-know-about-blue-balls/)).
Generally, people have asked and answered two questions about
[beneficence](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/principle-beneficence/) –
acting in a way that benefits another person:

> **Should we? _Probably._**  **Must we? _No, we have free will, or something like
it._**

This is the space in which those German citizens lived, and American citizens
during the 20-year Vietnam massacre. In so-called classical philosophy as in
[historical
narratives](http://www.spiegel.de/international/europe/the-road-to-world-war-ii-why-wasn-t-hitler-stopped-a-645707.html),
we can possibly forgive them, those unknown people long ago. That German laborer
should have said no to murdering others, but he had a job for the first time in
30 years, and a bit of pride and hope for the future, and could be expected to
make the best choice for himself and his family. Our cultural heritage, our
writing, and our thinking, all say that though the German people should have
helped, they and we must be free to not help, to not act, should we so choose.

## Where We Can Go

Though war apologists have a disproportionate effect on the business laws of the
land, they need not dictate our shared values. Thankfully, we have a frame
of reference for criminal responsibility, in that we have generally agreed to
certain laws that limit free choice. When our liberties infringe about those of
another person, when our actions become maleficent, then we are committing a
crime, and we must stop. Legally and historically, humans concur on the process
that follows a crime: stop, assess the consequences, and make amends. This, like
the questions at the borders between obligation and charity, is a religious,
philosophical, and personal truth in our society, the definition of a crime and
its consequences.

Thus we can ask: if bailing water on the Titanic would have helped, would it be
a crime to not pick up a bucket? Would the passengers and crew all be required
to haul water? What if she was the last ship on earth, and held the last of all
life? Certainly by dictate of biological instinct, and by right of every law
against violence that has ever in the history of mankind been spoken, written,
or pronounced, yes they should bail water to save humanity, and to abstain from
bailing is to commit a grave crime.  At once genocide, a suicide, and the
homicide of friends and family, unacceptable by any measure we set. 

Yes, if business people can act to save the world, then we must. Because our
privileges are the proceeds of murder, past, present, and ongoing. We must stop.
We must be truthful. We must make amends. 

> **_I’m glad you’re reading about this._**

Refusing to participate in such a charade is how we stop. We stop exploiting
people and seemingly low-cost options for inferior products. It’s not true that
our 2$ gizmo from China cost only 1$. It burned petrol, it's made of carelessly
toxic anything, and represents underpaid, unsafe, and undervalued labour in the
whole supply chain, including in our offices. And the full costs are paid not
only by people who will be treated as dead weight to feed when they can no
longer produce economical products, but will be also paid by me, and you, and
your family. Paid for in lost years of life, specifically because the production
and transport of all these things are poisoning our only environment, and
generally because humans under pressure tend to react violently. Even could no
ethical or legal case be made, we must out of self-preservation stop accounting
for things based on their last-paid cost, and taking them at their true,
systemic costs.

> **_Because climate change and murder, meine freund._**

Governments are not acting fast enough to save us, and they can’t. They have
their own geas, the inevitable weight of human institutions when they have
ceased functioning for the masses. They have furthermore been created to
maintain business as usual, and to do so in hiding. The effect of Mr. Chomsky’s
“cult of the expert”, on both “sides” of the political spectrum, in combination
with a huge market of distraction, a media that has only two topics of
discussion (How bad it is elsewhere, how it’s getting a little better here), and
an educational system too afraid of a youth revolt to teach critical thinking,
is to create a culture in which lying is ok. In fact, in which lies are
frequently defended as “a matter of opinion”, and “free speech”, instead of
being understood, respectively, as “destroying the credibility of public
discourse” and “propaganda” or "hate-mongering".

We have as a culture accepted that experts in social questions, in government or
out, can be trusted to act in our best interests, and that against every piece
of historical fact or evidence. They act in their own self-interest, that of the
very small, very rich minority in charge of governments. That interest is in
keeping the status quo, this situation that is going to kill us. Far from
outsourcing our critical thinking to a narrow caste, “educated” in the
extraordinarily selfish and short-sighted views of a [hero-myth](
http://public.wsu.edu/~hughesc/myth_of_self.htm) in which they and only they can
save us, we must instead be giving the tools and information to make those
decisions to absolutely everyone, and promoting cooperation towards useful ends,
and that as urgently as humanly possible.

The German citizens lived in a culture and power structure identical to ours,
and it’s [thousands of years old](http://history-world.org/neolithic1.htm). They
should have done better, and the stakes weren’t anything like what they are
today. Yet, perhaps we can do better. We have a few great advantages in our
century, among them the almost free exchange of information and translations.
Solutions, though lacking in powerful support, are emerging at every level of
human activity.

We can set triple-bottom line accounting standards that take into account social
and environmental costs in addition to traditionally counted expenses. Lobby
for, invest in, purchase from, and support people who are fighting to build a
survivable economy. Fight to stop oil subsidies and other earth-killers. To hold
board members personally accountable for the criminal acts of a corporation. To
reinstate progressive taxation. To create an educational system based on
cooperation, creativity, and critical thinking. To leverage technology to
eliminate or minimize representational politics, to be replaced with
proportionality and public service. To remove money from all levels of political
campaigns. Close the party system. Increase inheritance taxes. Insist on a free
press. Fund artists. Fund inventors. Trust people. There are many other rational
and required initiatives. You get to pick.

> **"_You were sick, but now you're well again, and there's work to do."  -Kurt
Vonnegut, Timequake_**

I understand that it's hard. I know that you were told a lie about how the world
worked, about your place in it, and about how other people lived their time
here. I was told the same. I forgive you for those years when you didn’t know
that our way of life was killing people. But now you do know. (If you don’t yet,
then watch these: [Before the Flood](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt5929776/),
[This Changes Everything](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1870548/)). Very, very few
humans have any choice or power at all in this train wreck, but we do, and it
bears repeating: because business people can act, we must. The cost of our
victory in the economic wars is extermination, and there is no power yet in
place to defeat us. Stop doing it. Stop lying about it. Fix it. Because after us
come the revolutions, and after that, the end.
